And now for a code challenge.
Here we will follow up on what you have learned so far, while focusing more on the impact of editing
the hidden states on the model's output in terms of token selection and log softmax values of a target
token.
You're also going to get a nice little reminder of how to calculate the loss per token.
The goal of exercise one is to set up the model and the experiment with some tokens and some baseline
activations.
So import the GPT two model and we will work with the medium size in this code challenge.
We won't be doing that many forward passes.
So I actually ran this whole thing on the CPU.
Of course you can put the model and the tokens on the GPU if you like.
Next, create a hook function that is similar to the function that I showed in the code demo in the
previous video, except this one here can be implanted into all of the layers, and the idea is that
you get to specify dynamically during the experiment which layer you want to scale, and by how much.
So you have seen code that allows you to pick one layer to manipulate before in the previous section.
The idea of running the code here is that you create a dictionary called scaling, fact dict, or whatever
else you would like to call it.
Anyway, the keys in this dictionary would be the layer number, and the value associated with that
key is also a number, and that indicates how much to scale the vectors in that layer.
So for example, if we would use this in the previous demo if we set up the previous demo like this.
Then the key would be the number two, and the value of that key would be the number 0.5.
Remember that because we are working with the hidden states here, you don't need to extract the activations
inside this hook because we can get them in the forward pass from setting output.
Hidden states equals true.
Once you have this hook set up, you can tokenize this quote from Einstein except the final word.
In other words, tokenize.
I have no special talents.
I am only passionately and basically what we are going to do in the rest of this code challenge is examine
the final model logits for the word passionately to see if the model can correctly predict that the
next word should be curious.
Okay, the last thing to do for exercise one is to run a forward pass with no scaling on any of the
transformer outputs, so that you have a baseline version of the hidden states that we can use for comparison
in later exercises.
Now you can pause the video and work through this exercise.
I don't think you will find it too challenging, considering that almost everything you need to do here,
we've already done in the last several videos.
Anyway, now I will switch to code and discuss my solution.
Import lots of libraries and so on.
Here I'm importing GPT two medium and also the tokenizer.
It doesn't actually matter if you do it with medium or just the GPT two small.
All of the GPT two tokenizers are the same, regardless of whether you use the small, medium, large,
or xlarge version.
Anyway, so while that is loading in, I can discuss the solution to this hook.
Okay, so here this code is all the same as what you saw in the code file in the previous video.
There's only two changes.
One is here that I get the scaling factor not from a variable, but from a value in this dictionary
associated with the key.
For layer number.
And then the second difference compared to the previous code demo is that I have this if statement here,
where I say if the layer number is in this in the keys here.
And the reason why this is useful is that we do not want to scale all of the hidden states vectors for
every single layer.
That's what would happen if you did this.
This would impact every single layer.
Instead, what we want to do is only modify the one layer that this hook is implanted in, only if it
has a corresponding key in this dictionary.
And when this is false, then of course all of this is skipped and then the output is exactly the same
as the output here.
Okay.
So now we can run this and implant this hook into all of the hidden modules.
All of the hidden layers.
Okay I have no special talent.
I'm only passionately blank okay.
And then we want to know what is the model going to predict.
Now we know that the correct answer is curious.
But there is another possible set of outcomes here, which is that the model gives a different word
that is not curious, but a word that also makes sense.
For example, I have no special talent.
I am only passionately interested, for example.
Okay, anyway, here is the target token index.
So what we are going to look for is the model's loss on this particular token 11,040 okay.
And then the last thing for exercise one is to run the model once with the tokens with no scaling factors
applied.
And here I call this pure logits.
That's the variable name.
That's the logits for this outcome here, the goal of exercise two is to scale one layer and examine
the impact on the final output logits.
So change the dictionary that the hook function reads to scale transformer layer two by a factor of
0.6.
Then you want to do a forward pass again with the same Einstein quote, and you get the output logits.
From that, you can make a scatter plot of the logits for all the vocab elements.
Now you've seen plots that look like this plenty of times earlier in the course.
The blue dots here are for the unscaled forward pass that you did in exercise one, and this is coming
from the last token in the sequence.
As you know, the model prediction for the next token is the vocab item that has the largest logit here.
Now, for now, don't worry about actually picking out that largest element.
We will get to that later.
For now, the goal is to compare the impact of scaling down layer two by a factor of 0.6.
I have switched off the red dots here so that you don't see what they look like.
But of course your plot will have red dots here in addition to these blue dots.
So now we have the final output logits for the two versions of the model on exactly the same tokens.
And so the next thing you can do is make a scatter plot of the scaled by the unscaled logits.
You can already see that the numerical range is at least slightly different for these two runs through
the model.
so scaled and the original or pure or clean unscaled logits.
So you also saw that in the previous video.
But the question is whether that difference in numbers has any meaningful impact.
So this scatterplot shows the two sets of logits.
And the idea is that if the correlation is one then it would mean that the numbers might be globally
shifted.
But that really had no impact on the model's behavior because all of the relative values are preserved
when scaling down.
Here you can see the correlation coefficient in the title.
And again this is the correlation between the blue dots and the red dots here.
Okay.
So that's for exercise two.
Now you can pause the video and switch to code.
And now I will switch to code and discuss the solution and what the results might mean.
Here I am recreating the dictionary to have the key of two and the value of 0.6.
As I mentioned in the previous video, it's super duper ultra mega important that this has exactly the
same spelling as what variables are being looked through inside this hook function.
Okay.
And let's see.
So then I just defined this.
And now this code is the same.
We don't need to do anything special inside the forward pass okay.
And then I'm getting the logits here.
And I'm calling them a different variable name from what we had in exercise one okay.
So now we can plot that.
And I showed you half of this plot already in the slides.
So now we can see what the other half looks like.
So you see there is a global downward shift.
So scaling the layer.
What was it.
Layer two.
Scaling down layer two by a factor of 0.6 had a pretty significant impact.
That's a pretty noticeable change.
It's a global suppression of all of the activity in the model, propagating forward all the way until
the very, very end of the model, until the UN embeddings matrix that calculates the final output logits.
So it's pretty significant.
Okay.
So now the question is does that matter.
Right.
When we are thinking about choosing the next token, what we do is we pick out whatever token has the
largest value here.
So does it matter that they are globally pushed down?
Uh, and yeah.
So to address that question, uh, it's a complicated question.
There's multiple factors to it.
But one thing we can do is look at the correlation between them.
So you see the correlation is 0.995.
Let me actually, uh I want to just expand this out a little bit further.
So it's nine nine.
What is this 994792.
This is a really strong correlation.
That said, it's not one.
It's not a perfect correlation.
So there actually was a little bit of wiggling and adjusting in here.
Uh, but the next token selection the generation procedure is not purely based on the maximum.
Right.
So that would be the case if we have a deterministic system.
But very often when generating model outputs, we don't just look at the top, we do a softmax.
Uh logsoftmax.
We probabilistically pick based on some probabilities.
And that actually means that this global suppression could have an impact on the values that are selected
probabilistically, if it has an impact on the log softmax.
Now let's switch from looking at numbers to looking at words.
The goal of exercise three is to pick out the top ten logits for each of the two versions of the model.
You can create a table that looks like this.
So I picked out the ten largest for the two models.
And here I'm showing how this model would complete the sentence.
So it turns out that the top logit for both models is exactly the same token.
Categorically incorrect.
But it is sort of semantically related and certainly seems contextually accurate.
So then the question is what happens after that?
So this is the first part of exercise three.
The second part of exercise three is to calculate the loss for the token.
Curious.
Now we know for a fact that the next token in this sequence should be the word curious.
Technically space curious.
So calculate the loss in the scaled and the unscaled models for the token corresponding to the word
curious again with a space in front so that it fits in the sentence.
And remember that smaller numbers are better.
And of course, the question here is whether interfering with the model made it perform worse overall,
which would mean that the loss would be higher in the scaled version compared to the unscaled version
of the model.
I hope you enjoy working through this exercise, and now I will switch to code and discuss my solution.
Here I'm applying Argsort to get the sorting indices from the pure logits and the scaled logits, and
we are only interested in the final token because we.
Yeah, this tells us about the prediction for the next token.
Descending equals true so that we get the largest value in the beginning.
And here's where I format and then print out the text information.
Okay, so you've already seen that the top token is interested.
And also the next one is passionate.
But then we start getting some differences.
I am passionately committed.
I'm passionately trying.
All these words are sort of, you know, they they could kind of fit in here.
But here we know that this is the correct word.
Curious.
So curious is in both of these versions in the top ten, but curiously, curious actually appears higher
in the list for the scaled version compared to the Unscaled version.
So it kind of seems like the scaled version, like manipulating the interior dynamics of the model,
actually had a beneficial impact, at least in this particular example.
Okay, so next we calculate the loss.
The loss for one token is pretty simple to calculate.
We calculate.
We just get the log softmax over all of the tokens.
Again, for the Or sorry, all of the elements in the vocab for the final token.
So that is the log softmax.
And then we want to know just the one for the target token.
And then we take minus that.
So this is the negative log likelihood loss for this one token here.
And consistent with this curious finding up here, we actually see that the loss is lower in the scaled
model compared to the Unscaled model.
And that means that even though the model would not have picked out curious as if it's just picking
out the largest logit token, it actually was closer to being correct when we scaled it down compared
to the Unscaled version.
This is the final exercise in this code challenge.
The goal here is to repeat the loss calculation and the correlation that you have computed in exercise
two and three, but now doing it over all of the layers.
There are 24 layers in the medium version of this model.
So in a for loop you want to scale each layer at a time.
So you're just scaling one layer at a time in a for loop.
You can also use a scaling factor of 0.6.
Calculate the target loss just like in the previous exercise, and also the correlation between all
of the logits for the scaled and the unscaled versions of the model, as you did in exercise two.
And then you can visualize those results in two plots like what you see here.
So here on the left we have the target losses.
It's always the same number for the Unscaled model of course.
So therefore you can draw that as a horizontal line.
That's what you see here.
And here you see the result for what happens when you scale down the final transformer block by a factor
of 0.6.
And the question is what do all of the earlier blocks look like?
And over here on the right are the correlations between the scaled and unscaled logits.
Again for each transformer block.
So now you can pause the video and wrap up this code challenge.
And now I will switch to code and bring us home.
Here is where I initialize the output variables.
So for the losses and the correlations here I'm getting the log softmax for the pure unscaled version
of this model.
And yeah again this is for the final token.
We want to know what is the prediction for the subsequent token.
Okay then here I'm looping over the layers in the model.
Here I'm recreating the scaling dictionary.
The value is always fixed at 0.6.
And what I'm changing is the key.
So the layer I.
This is the layer index from zero up to the number of layers.
Forward pass etc..
Here I'm getting the output logits.
Also softmax log softmax defying them.
Is that a real word.
Uh and then picking out the target token and.
Yeah.
Minus the negative log likelihood of that.
And here I'm correlating using torch.
This is slightly awkward syntax but the torch function doesn't take two vectors.
You know you would like to be able to input two vectors a and B like this and calculate the correlation
coefficient between them.
That is not how Torch Cove works.
Instead, you have to input a matrix, and PyTorch will calculate the correlation matrix based on all
of the columns in that matrix.
So therefore I have to actually create that matrix using torch, dot, concatenate and then yeah, it
also needs to be unsqueezed.
This is.
Yeah, to be honest, I think it's easier to transform everything into numpy and then use numpy coef.
But I wanted to include this formulation here just as a reminder of how this works in PyTorch.
Okay, so anyway, then we get the correlations and then that won't take too long to go through.
We can visualize all of those results as you see here.
Okay.
So again the red line up here is the loss for the uh target token.
Curious from the Unscaled model.
This is our reference point.
And you see most of the time a few outliers notwithstanding, most of the time the scaled model actually
had a lower loss compared to the Unscaled model.
And it kind of seems like the loss is increasing as we get deeper into the model.
It's not really a perfect monotonic function, so I certainly wouldn't make a big deal out of that particular
finding.
And here you see the correlations.
They are really, really high.
So 0.992 is like the lowest correlation.
That is a crazy high correlation coefficient.
Doing lots of detailed circuit analysis can be interesting and fun and insightful, but ultimately it's
also important to try to link the internal dynamics to model outputs whenever possible.
And that's because at the end of the day, what we really care about is the kinds of text that the model
produces.
Now, that's not always possible or necessary to focus your analyses on the final model output and text
generation.
But when you can link your Internal model manipulations and investigations to token selection, then
that will help your findings be more interpretable and more impactful.
The last point I want to mention is that global scaling is kind of like decreasing the temperature in
softmax.
It's not exactly literally what happens because there are still multiple stages of transformations and
normalizations.
But decreasing the softmax temperature is one way to think about the impact of global scaling of these
embeddings vectors.
The model seems to be doing better, but really what's happening is that the model distribution is getting
sharper.
So that happened to be a good thing in this particular example.
But as I've discussed earlier in the course, having a more restricted and less stochastic token selection
is not always a desired property.